european flagEUROPEAN COMMISSION

Brussels, 10.3.2023

JOIN(2023) 8 final

JOINT COMMUNICATION TO THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL

on the update of the EU Maritime Security Strategy and its Action Plan







"An enhanced EU Maritime Security Strategy for evolving maritime threats"


I.Introduction

Maritime security is vital to the European Union (EU) and to its Member States. Together, the EU’s Member States form the largest combined exclusive economic zone in the world. The EU economy depends greatly on safe and secure oceans: over 80% of global trade is seaborne, about two-thirds of the world’s oil and gas supply is either extracted at sea or transported by sea 1 , and up to 99% of global data flows are transmitted through undersea cables 2 . To ensure effective ocean governance, to protect our oceans and seabeds, and to unlock the full potential of the sustainable blue economy 3 , the global maritime domain must be secure.

Since 2014, the European maritime security strategy (EUMSS) and action plan 4  have provided the framework for addressing security challenges at sea. The strategy has stimulated closer cooperation between civilian and military authorities, in particular through information exchange. It has helped promote rules-based governance at sea and has given a boost to international cooperation. It has strengthened the EU’s autonomy and capacity to respond to maritime security threats 5 .

The EU plays an increasingly important role as a global maritime security provider, by conducting its own naval operations, e.g. Atalanta 6 and Irini 7 , implementing the Coordinated Maritime Presences (CMP) 8 concept, and promoting maritime situational awareness and cooperating with a wide range of external partners. In addition, the Copernicus maritime and border surveillance operational systems, implemented by the European Maritime Safety Agency (EMSA) and the European Border and Coast Guard Agency (Frontex), provide space-based observations, complementing the navigation services of Galileo satellites.

The overall strategic environment is experiencing drastic changes. Reshaped by the climate crisis and environmental degradation and aggravated by Russia’s illegal and unjustified military aggression against Ukraine, it demands more action from the EU as an international security provider.

In line with the EU Strategic Compass for Security and Defence, 9 this update of the EUMSS and its action plan aims to respond to the new challenges. It is an opportunity to drive forward sustainable solutions to maritime security problems. It is also an opportunity to further enhance the EU’s role internationally and further secure the EU’s access to an increasingly contested maritime domain.

The updated EUMSS is a framework for the EU to take further action to protect its interests at sea, and to protect its citizens, values and economy. The aim is to promote international peace and security while adhering to the principle of sustainability and protecting biodiversity. The EU and its Member States will implement the updated strategy, in line with their respective competences.

II.Evolving and growing threats to maritime security

Much has changed in the global geopolitical context since the European maritime security strategy was adopted in 2014, requiring new and enhanced action. The EU Threat Analysis demonstrates that the EU is facing an increase in threats and challenges, including in the maritime domain 10 . Strategic competition for power and resources is increasing. Threats are becoming increasingly complex and multi-layered, with some countries seeking to re-define the core tenets of the multilateral order, including through violations of national sovereignty and borders. Russia’s military aggression against Ukraine has brought war back to Europe and created new dangers, as well as negative spill-over effects on maritime security and the European economy, impacting European citizens and businesses.

Maritime security is being challenged in many regions, including territorial and maritime disputes, competition for natural resources and threats to freedom of navigation and rights of innocent and transit passage. Such challenges create tensions in sea basins around the EU such as the Mediterranean, the Black and the Baltic Seas, exacerbated by Russia’s military aggression against Ukraine. There has also been an increase in challenges to maritime security beyond Europe, namely in the Gulf of Guinea, the Gulf of Aden, the Strait of Hormuz, the Strait of Malacca, and in the South China Sea. Some non-EU countries are increasing their capabilities and assertiveness at sea and are taking unilateral action. This has included the use of force or breaching other countries’ national sovereignty. These actions challenge the rule of law and the international order based on the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS).

The Indo-Pacific region, where the EU has Outermost Regions (Indian Ocean) and Overseas Countries and Territories (Pacific), has become an area of intense geopolitical competition. The display of force and increased tensions in regions such as the South and East China Sea and the Taiwan Strait affect global security and have a direct impact on European security and prosperity. Maintaining stability and security along key shipping routes - such as the Malacca and Singapore Straits, the Horn of Africa and the Indian Ocean - means that the EU and its Member States need to expand their presence and action in these regions, in line with the EU strategy for cooperation in the Indo-Pacific.

Climate change and marine pollution are expected to have substantial, long-lasting adverse impacts on maritime security. The impacts will include flooding in coastal areas and islands, the loss of coral reefs, mangroves and other wetlands, and the depletion of fish stocks 11 . Climate change and environmental degradation act as risk multipliers by increasing instability and inequality, exacerbating transnational crime, piracy and tensions over marine resources. This requires a new prism allowing the EU to make society more climate-resilient, protect nature and reverse the degradation of ecosystems 12 . Conversely, gaps in maritime security may result in environmental damage, such as hindered access to contaminated sites, diversion of funds from environmental protection or acts of sabotage against maritime infrastructure. In addition, Russia’s military aggression against Ukraine has not only caused devastating human and economic impacts, but also a significant loss of biodiversity 13 . It is therefore important to tackle the interactions between climate change, environmental degradation of coastal and maritime areas, and maritime security, including through ongoing and new targeted research.

The 2022 attacks on the Nord Stream pipelines in the Baltic Sea, the presence of unauthorised unmanned vehicles around offshore installations in the North Sea and the recurrent hybrid and cyber-attacks targeting maritime infrastructure require the EU to bolster its action and protect its critical infrastructure more effectively, in particular by developing innovative technologies. As the maritime industry undergoes digital transformation, its complexity and potential vulnerabilities have increased. Malicious actors are increasingly likely to use hybrid and cyber means to target maritime infrastructure, including undersea cables and pipelines, as well as ports and ships. The Council Recommendation on a Union-wide coordinated approach to strengthen the resilience of critical infrastructure 14 acknowledges this need for action. Additionally, the Commission recommendation on Union disaster resilience goals set out measures which can contribute to EU’s and Member States’ better preparedness for and ability to respond to natural and man-made disasters, including at sea 15 .

Threats and illicit activities – such as piracy and armed robbery at sea, organised crime, including smuggling of migrants and trafficking of human beings, trafficking of arms and narcotics, terrorism, illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing, other illegal activities, including unauthorised exploration in the exclusive economic zones of EU Member States, and unexploded ordnance (UXO) 16 at sea – remain equally critical challenges in multiple regions with some coastal areas and remote territories of the EU being particularly vulnerable. Some of these illicit activities may be facilitated by poor port security. Malicious actors may also combine these threats and activities to carry out hybrid attacks against the EU and its Member States. 

III.EU maritime security interests

In the face of evolving maritime security threats, the EU’s fundamental interests are:

·the security of the European Union, its Member States, citizens and partners;

·preserving global peace and stability, and keeping maritime shipping routes free and open; 

·upholding international law, in particular UNCLOS as the overarching legal framework governing all activities in the ocean, and promoting sound international ocean governance, including through regional sea conventions, as well as the implementation of the WTO agreement on fisheries subsidies 17 ;

·protecting natural resources and the marine environment, and managing the impact of climate change and environmental degradation on maritime security;

·ensuring the resilience and protection of critical maritime infrastructure 18  (onshore and offshore), including by addressing the risks and threats related to climate change, and those that arise from foreign direct investments;

·strengthening the resilience and protection of logistical hubs, i.e. ports, including addressing risks associated with corruption and illicit activities;

·protecting economic activities at sea, thereby contributing to a sustainable blue economy (both onshore and offshore);

·protecting the EU’s external borders, and its internal security, to address the smuggling of migrants, trafficking of human beings, and other illegal activities including unauthorised exploration and drilling activities for hydrocarbons;

·ensuring the capacity to act promptly and effectively in the maritime domain, and in other operational domains (i.e. land, air, cyber and outer space);

·ensuring the safety and security of seafarers in line with the requirements of the Maritime Labour Convention and other relevant conventions of the International Labour Organisation..

IV.Strengthening the EU's response

The updated maritime security strategy will help protect EU's interests listed above, from the evolving and growing maritime security threats. To do so, the EU will step up action under six strategic objectives:

1.step up activities at sea;

2.cooperate with partners;

3.lead in maritime domain awareness 19 ;

4.manage risks and threats;

5.enhance capabilities;

6.educate and train.

EU action under these strategic objectives will continue to be guided by the principles of the 2014 EUMSS: cross-sectoral approach, functional integrity, respect for international rules – international law, human rights and democracy and full compliance with UNCLOS - and maritime multilateralism. The updated EUMSS will be implemented via an Action Plan (in annex) and in the framework of the Integrated Approach 20 . To implement the strategy, together with its Member States, the EU will use all relevant civilian and military policies, tools and instruments, and coordinate policies and activities of all relevant players at European, regional and national level, strengthening their synergies and complementarities. The strategy will also promote a more coherent engagement of the EU in external conflicts and crises, to enhance the security of the EU and its citizens.

The updated strategy will feature actions specific to each sea basin around the EU. Action should take account of regional EU strategies 21  and capacity building programmes, as well as cooperation with partner countries.

1.Step up activities at sea

The EU Strategic Compass calls for further strengthening the EU’s engagement on maritime security. Under the Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP) framework, Operation Atalanta has been operating in the Western Indian Ocean since 2008.  Given its successful track record, Operation Atalanta has seen its mandate expanded from the fight against piracy into a broader maritime security operation and it is further strengthening links and synergies with the European Maritime Awareness Mission in the Strait of Hormuz (EMASOH) 22 . In the Mediterranean Sea, Operation Irini has as its primary task to enforce the UN arms embargo on Libya. This is a direct EU contribution to peace and stability in the Mediterranean, enhancing maritime security. In line with the Integrated Approach, the EU also contributes to enhancing maritime security by providing training and capacity building for partners through civilian CSDP missions, such as the European Union Capacity Building Mission (EUCAP) Somalia. 

In 2021, the EU introduced the new concept of the Coordinated Maritime Presences (CMP). This flexible new tool aims to boost the EU’s collective engagement on maritime security by making best use of Member States’ naval assets in areas that are of strategic interest for the EU. In the context of CMP, the EU should step up the fight against illegal and illicit activities at sea, including drug trafficking. Based on the experience gained through CMP implementation in the Gulf of Guinea and in the North-Western Indian Ocean (including in the Red Sea), the EU will consider new maritime areas of interest where to implement this concept. The establishment of new maritime areas of interest would increase the EU’s situational awareness, partnerships, and strategic culture as a maritime security actor.

The EU Strategic Compass also underlines the importance of ensuring readiness and interoperability among EU Member States’ naval forces, and calls for the EU to conduct live exercises in all domains. The EU will therefore launch an annual naval exercise to boost readiness, foster interoperability and tackle the evolving threats to maritime security.

The Commission, assisted by EMSA, carries out maritime security inspections in ports, port facilities and ships in the EU, and is exploring ways to enhance maritime security in domains like passenger ships or cyber-security. In line with the strategic guidelines on the European Integrated Border Management (EIBM) 23 , the sea border surveillance system must be able to detect, identify and, if necessary, trace and intercept all vessels coming into territorial waters and contribute to ensuring the protection and saving of lives at sea in all weather conditions. Member States should make best use of surveillance capabilities offered by Frontex to upgrade national capabilities and overall situational awareness. 

Frontex conducts operations such as Indalo, Themis and Poseidon to control the EU borders and to fight crime in the Mediterranean Sea, in particular the illegal smuggling of migrants. Frontex, the European Fisheries Control Agency (EFCA) and EMSA conduct multipurpose maritime operations to fight cross-border crime, including the smuggling of migrants and the trafficking of human beings, to detect marine pollution and illegal fishing, and carry out other surveillance tasks in multiple sea basins around the EU, including the Black Sea. The EU should further develop these important multipurpose operations.

The key EU actions 24  to enhance maritime security will be:

·organising an annual EU naval exercise;

·reinforcing existing EU naval operations (Atalanta and Irini) with naval and air assets;

·considering new maritime areas of interest in which to implement the CMP concept, based on lessons learnt and on proposals from the European External Action Service;

·stepping up the fight against illegal and illicit activities at sea, including drug trafficking, in the context of CMP;

·maintaining and reinforcing maritime security inspections in the EU and addressing cyber-security and passenger ship security;

·stepping up EU-level cooperation on coast guard functions by promoting the development of multipurpose maritime operations in multiple sea basins around the EU.

2.Cooperate with partners

The EU has already forged relations and synergies on maritime security with multilateral and regional organisations both at global and at regional level (e.g. with the UN, IMO 25 , NATO, AU 26  and ASEAN 27 ) and with several non-EU countries in particular in the Gulf of Guinea and the Indo-Pacific.

The EU and its Member States have also developed international cooperation through bilateral dialogues, port calls and live exercises, notably in the Indo-Pacific region, e.g. with Australia, Japan, India, Indonesia, Republic of Korea, Oman and Singapore. Operations Atalanta and Irini participate in mechanisms for sharing awareness and for multilateral engagement, including Shared Awareness and Deconfliction (SHADE) Conferences. The European Union also provides significant support for maritime security under its development cooperation, humanitarian aid, and foreign policy support measures.

In the Western Indian Ocean, the EU supports a regional maritime architecture based on information fusion and operation centres in Madagascar and Seychelles, as well as on the Djibouti Code of Conduct concerning the Repression of Piracy and Armed Robbery against Ships in the Western Indian Ocean and the Gulf of Aden. 28

Similarly, in the Gulf of Guinea, the EU supports regional organisations and coastal states implementing their own maritime security strategies, strengthening maritime law enforcement and justice, enhancing port security and safety, increasing maritime domain awareness and information sharing under the Yaoundé Architecture 29 . In the broader Atlantic Ocean, the EU supports the fight against illicit activities in cooperation with partners, in particular the fight against drug trafficking.

In a challenging geopolitical context, the EU should step up cooperation with partners in its neighbourhood and in other strategically important maritime areas. This is particularly important in light of Russia’s military aggression against Ukraine. The EU will intensify its cooperation with NATO on maritime security, building on the results achieved and in line with the third Joint Declaration on EU-NATO cooperation of January 2023. In the Indo-Pacific, the EU should increase the exchange of experience with partners on maritime security through the project “Enhancing Security Cooperation in and with Asia” (ESIWA) and bilateral dialogues and by seeking to be granted observer status (‘Dialogue partner’) in the Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA). The EU should also deepen its cooperation with like-minded countries and organisations including international and regional fora on maritime affairs.

The key EU actions on international cooperation will be:

·encouraging the signature and ratification of international instruments related to maritime security, notably UNCLOS, and promoting compliance, and sharing of best practices with partners, in implementing international law relevant for maritime security, in relevant fora;

·intensifying EU-NATO staff-to-staff cooperation on maritime security to cover all issues of mutual interest in this domain, including unexploded ordnance at sea, building on the three Joint Declarations of 2016, 2018 and 2023;

·conducting joint naval exercises with partners to boost interoperability, in addition to carrying out more frequent EU port calls and patrols, particularly in the Indo-Pacific, in line with the Strategic Compass;

·deploying EU liaison officers to maritime information fusion centres 30 in maritime areas of interest to promote information exchange and cooperation, including on law enforcement, justice and home affairs, between the EU and its partners and, where appropriate, evaluating the feasibility of directly connecting these fusion centres with relevant EU maritime surveillance systems;

·seeking Dialogue Partner status for the EU in the Indian Ocean Rim Association to enhance the EU’s role as a partner in maritime security in the region;

·promoting international cooperation on information exchange and the surveillance of critical maritime infrastructure, including undersea cables 31 , as well as on ship and port security 32 .

3.Lead in maritime domain awareness

Sound maritime domain awareness is vital to ensuring that competent authorities can swiftly detect the growing and evolving threats affecting the EU and respond to them effectively. The EU will lead in maritime domain awareness by enhancing information collection and exchange among different maritime sectors 33 , and facilitating information sharing between Member States. At the international level, the EU will continue its work of enhancing Maritime Domain Awareness (MDA) capacities of partner countries through information sharing and capacity building, especially in the Gulf of Guinea and in the Indo-Pacific.

Since 2014, the EU and its Member States have made significant progress in acquiring and exchanging information in the maritime domain by developing and connecting the sector-specific systems used by different authorities involved in maritime surveillance 34 . In particular, the EU has developed the Common Information Sharing Environment (CISE) 35 . Based on voluntary participation, the CISE will facilitate real-time information sharing between different authorities responsible for coast guard functions, including the military, connecting concerned authorities within and across Member States. On the basis of the EU CISE2020 research project, in April 2019 the Commission launched the transitional phase of CISE, entrusting its coordination to EMSA, in close cooperation with the Member States 36 . Building on the transitional phase, the Commission intends to launch the operational phase in 2024 with the support of EMSA, subject to the agreement of its Administrative Board.

On defence, the maritime surveillance project (MARSUR) supported by the European Defence Agency (EDA) was designed to enable the naval forces of contributing Member States to exchange operational maritime information and services. MARSUR provides operational added value, as attested by the fact that the EU Member States chose to use it to implement the CMP concept in the Gulf of Guinea and in the North-Western Indian Ocean. EDA and participating Member States are currently working on the strengthening of MARSUR through a dedicated programme. In line with the Strategic Compass, which calls on the EU to strengthen its intelligence-based situational awareness and capabilities, the EU should make full use of all maritime surveillance capabilities (e.g. drones, patrol aircraft and space-based technology). The EU Space programme, through its components like Copernicus, Galileo and IRIS²  37 , can contribute directly to increasing MDA. The EU Satellite Centre (EU SatCen) is also involved in MDA through its work with the EU Single Intelligence Analysis Capacity, and with the Commission on Galileo/Copernicus. In that regard, the resilience and security of relevant space assets is key to ensure continuity of services.

The EU has set up inter-agency cooperation between EFCA, EMSA and Frontex to support national coast guard authorities, including in the field of maritime situational awareness. The European Coast Guard Functions Forum and the Mediterranean Coast Guard Functions Forum can contribute to heightening maritime domain awareness and operational cooperation by exchanging best practices.

In case of disasters or accidents and when national capacities are overwhelmed, EU Member States and third countries can activate the Union Civil Protection Mechanism 38 . Through the Emergency Response Coordination Centre 39 , they can seek assistance, expertise or analysis of the situation.

The EU also contributes to enhancing MDA at international level by running dedicated development cooperation capacity-building initiatives. The project ‘Critical Maritime Routes in the Indo-Pacific’ (CRIMARIO) 40 has developed specific tools 41 to enhance MDA and strengthen cooperation with and among regional partners. This is coherent with the EU’s broader security and defence engagement in the Indo-Pacific region. In the similar vein, the project ‘Gulf of Guinea Interregional Network’ (GoGIN) 42 developed the YARIS platform, an information-sharing tool in support of the ‘Yaoundé Architecture’.

The key EU actions on maritime domain awareness will be:

·ensuring that the Common Information Sharing Environment becomes operational by mid-2024, enabling secure and structured exchange of classified and unclassified information among authorities from different maritime surveillance sectors (civilian and military);

·strengthening the defence maritime surveillance information exchange network (MARSUR) by launching a dedicated programme through EDA, and enhancing links between MARSUR and CISE;

·capitalising on the investment made through the EU Space Policy and further exploiting the capacities available through Copernicus on maritime surveillance, marine environment monitoring and climate change; 

·integrating space-based technologies, remotely piloted aircraft systems and radar stations, maritime patrol aircraft, and manned and unmanned seaborne means through innovative, cyber-resilient tools to boost maritime situational awareness;

·stepping up coastal and offshore patrol vessel surveillance and complementing it with digitally networked high-end naval platforms, including naval unmanned platforms to enhance prevention and response capabilities;

·strengthening maritime domain awareness capabilities of partner countries through the GoGIN and CRIMARIO projects, including by further operationalising maritime situational awareness tools (YARIS, IORIS and SHARE.IT) in coordination with Copernicus satellite services.

4.Manage risks and threats

In line with the Strategic Compass, the EU and its Member States will improve their collective ability to defend their security and increase their resilience and preparedness for maritime security challenges, including hybrid and cyber threats. The EU and its Member States should be able to react quickly, with coordinated civilian and military capabilities.

Fighting climate change and environmental degradation are among the EU's top political priorities that are reflected in its external action through many thematic or geographical strategies such as Global Gateway or the Strategy for Cooperation in the Indo-Pacific, as well as through EU diplomatic outreach and EU Climate Diplomacy.

The EU has already taken significant steps to achieve climate neutrality by 2050, and will take further action on problems interlinked with climate change, environmental degradation and security. The High Representative and the Commission will present a Joint Communication on the nexus between climate change, environmental degradation and security and defence in mid-2023. It will include, inter alia, proposals for tools assessing the causes and consequences of climate change and environmental degradation on the maritime sector, on maritime infrastructure, as well as on natural and man-made features of coastal areas, including as regards early warning, evidence-based research and satellite imagery (e.g. through Copernicus programme).

In the Arctic, the ice caps are melting, sea ice is receding, new shipping routes are gradually opening up, and the consequent increase in human activities is expected to generate or aggravate threats to the environment and to local communities. In this regard the Joint Communication on “A stronger EU engagement for a greener, peaceful and prosperous Arctic” 43 must be further operationalised as soon as possible in particular with regard to zero emission shipping in the Arctic Ocean, sustainable mining of critical raw materials, and sustainable development of the Arctic regions.

Protecting critical infrastructure in the maritime domain also remains a key priority. The EU should complement the role of Member States in building up the resilience of critical maritime infrastructure such as pipelines or undersea cables that run across national maritime borders. It should improve current risk assessments on undersea cables and complement them with response options and mitigating measures building on cross-sectoral expertise and capacities. It is imperative to provide continued support to Member States to develop underwater protective assets and counter-drone solutions. In addition, the EU should continue to facilitate the coexistence 44 of offshore renewable energy with defence activities 45 , as advocated in the offshore renewable strategy 46 .

With the Directive on the resilience of critical entities 47 and the revised Directive on the security of network and information systems (NIS 2 Directive) 48 , the EU is at the forefront of relevant developments, with a comprehensive legal framework allowing it to upgrade both the physical and the cyber resilience of critical entities and infrastructure. The EU should step up cooperation with key partners and relevant non-EU countries in this area, in particular through the EU-NATO structured dialogue on resilience and the task force on resilience of critical infrastructure.

The EU faces the additional challenge posed by large quantities of unexploded ordnance (UXO) and chemical weapons originating from the First and Second World Wars lying in sea basins around the EU. This challenge is further exacerbated by Russia’s military aggression against Ukraine, resulting in a large number of mines present in the Black Sea. The type, location and quantity of this ordnance are poorly documented, which poses risks to maritime safety and security, to the environment (due to possible release of chemicals) and to blue economy activities (e.g. the construction of offshore renewable energy sites). Building on existing successful projects 49 , the EU should address this issue urgently and comprehensively, mitigating the environmental risks associated with UXO and their disposal. It will also be very important to dispose safely of UXO and mines left in the Black Sea, as soon as security and political conditions allow.

Maritime security is also undermined by foreign actors, both due to risks related to foreign direct investment in critical infrastructure, and to information manipulation and interference by such actors. These issues will be addressed through relevant instruments and frameworks; e.g. foreign direct investment will be screened in line with the relevant Regulation 50 .

The Commission and Member States are carrying out a risk assessment in view of producing guidance to enhance passenger ship security in the EU.

The key EU actions on risk and threat management will be:

·conducting regular, full-scale, live exercises at EU level, focused on harbour protection and on countering threats such as cyber and hybrid ones, in addition to the annual naval exercise mentioned above;

·deploying assets and surveillance tools (e.g. RPAS) and ensure the optimal use of current and future space services (such as earth observation) to patrol and protect critical maritime infrastructure;

·developing EU regional cooperation plans to ensure the surveillance of underwater and offshore infrastructure;

·developing a coherent framework to address the threats posed by UXO, active weapons and chemical weapons at sea, monitoring and removing them with innovative technologies and at a minimal environmental impact;

·improving early warning and strategic foresight, inter alia through the use of space services, on the effects of climate change, particularly sea-level rise, storm surges, and environmental degradation;

·drawing up new and reinforcing existing risk assessments, contingency plans and disaster recovery plans (EU level and national level) for ports, coastal infrastructure, as well as passenger ship security and transport / supply chains;

·encouraging the exchange of best practices between maritime actors on cyber threats, and further addressing cybersecurity at the level of the International Maritime Organisation (IMO);

·enhancing maritime domain awareness in the Arctic, including space observation; continued engagement with Arctic coastal States bilaterally and in relevant multilateral fora, as appropriate, to support the implementation of the Arctic Policy 51 ;

·assessing the possibility of deploying offshore renewable projects and other sustainable uses in maritime areas reserved or used for military activities;

·assessing investment into maritime infrastructure by non-EU countries and entities in the context of the cooperation mechanism set up by the Regulation on the screening of foreign direct investments.

5. Enhance capabilities

To promote its maritime security interests, the EU should accelerate the development of both civilian and military capabilities, involving industry as appropriate. Research &Development (R&D) on civilian aspects of European maritime security is included in the Civil Security for Society cluster of the EU Horizon Europe programme. Current and upcoming R&D will support capability development at the EU level, including protection of critical maritime infrastructure, management of underwater threats, preparedness and response to anthropogenic and natural disasters, security of maritime passenger transport, and management of UXO, involving industry where appropriate.

In the area of defence, Member States should develop a full spectrum of maritime capabilities, making full use of the scope for cooperation under related EU initiatives 52 . In particular, they should focus on boosting capabilities to ensure EU surface superiority, to project power at sea, to enable underwater control and to contribute to air defence.

The upcoming revision of the Capability Development Plan 53 will also draw on the lessons learnt from Russia’s military aggression against Ukraine. For instance, EDA will explore the key technologies required to manage maritime unmanned drone swarms and to protect critical seabed infrastructure.

As called for by the Strategic Compass and in line with the Coordinated Annual Review on Defence (CARD) 54 , national and multinational projects should aim to both overcome fragmentation in critical assets such as corvette-size vessels and on-board systems and improve the operational effectiveness of individual platforms. Several opportunities for cooperation identified in the 2020 CARD cycle have led to Permanent Structured Cooperation (PESCO) projects in unmanned maritime systems, e.g. the Medium-Size Semi-Autonomous Surface Vehicle. The European Defence Fund 55 will assess research and development projects, for example on maritime situational awareness, maritime surveillance capabilities, critical maritime infrastructure protection and underwater capabilities.

The key EU actions to enhance capabilities will be:

·developing common requirements and concepts for technology in defence, including for maritime domain awareness, both at the surface and underwater;

·building interoperable unmanned systems to monitor critical maritime infrastructure, to counter hostile drone swarms etc.;

·increasing modern mine countermeasures capabilities, e.g. by developing an EU concept of operations;

·supporting the development of joint enhanced maritime patrol aircraft capabilities;

·building up joint testing and experimentation exercises to develop future, state-of-the-art maritime capabilities.

6.Educate and train

A high level of specialised education, skills and training is indispensable for the EU to be equipped to tackle present and future maritime security challenges. Tackling new hybrid and cyber threats requires operators with strong digital skillsets and specific re-skilling and up-skilling programmes. Solutions in the form of exchanges between military training programmes, joint training programmes between the navies of EU Member States and between different institutions will boost interoperability and help the EU respond to new threats in a more effective, coordinated and inclusive way.

As part of the Practical handbook on European cooperation on coast guard functions, a training catalogue has been created, covering all courses run by EU Agencies across all maritime domains. The handbook will be updated on a rolling basis in line with needs and developments. The successful European Coast Guard Functions Training Academy Network project (ECGFA NET) and the harmonised training course on the coast guard function should continue, especially the exchange programme, which involves neighbouring countries and regional cooperation through a dedicated project implemented by EFCA in close cooperation with EMSA and Frontex. EMSA is also developing a course on maritime cybersecurity. The Hybrid Centre of Excellence in Helsinki (Hybrid CoE) organises courses and conferences on hybrid threats affecting the maritime domain. Gender equality and the empowerment of women in the EU maritime security sector should be supported, promoting access to high level technical education and training for women.

The European Security and Defence College (ESDC) 56  provides EU-level training and education for both civilian and military personnel to promote a common understanding of maritime security challenges and raise awareness about the increasing role of EU in this field. With support from the ESDC, six European naval academies are currently working on the content of a common, international naval semester.

The key EU actions on education and training 57  will be:

·boosting cyber-, hybrid- and space-related security skills by supporting new and existing training courses offered by various academic institutions and competent national or EU bodies, both in the civilian and military areas;

·conducting dedicated training programmes open to non-EU partners to tackle existing and emerging threats to maritime security;

·developing an ‘international naval semester’ under the European Initiative for the Exchange of Military Young Officers (EMILYO) 58 ;

·conducting civil-military exercises based on scenarios involving shared jurisdiction or shared use of capabilities.

V.Tools and instruments to support EU action on maritime security

The updated strategy should be implemented in the spirit of the integrated approach to maximise synergies and bring in complementary EU tools and instruments. This should include:

·the European Defence Fund R&D defence projects to boost the capabilities of the armed forces of EU Member States;

·the European Peace Facility as an off-budget funding mechanism for EU action under the Common Foreign and Security Policy with military and defence implications;

·EU research and innovation on civilian maritime security capabilities particularly under Cluster 3 ‘Civil Security for Society’ of the EU's Horizon Europe programme.

·the opportunities offered by the Internal Security Fund and Border Management and Visa Instrument to boost the capabilities of Member State coast guard authorities carrying out law enforcement and border control tasks at sea;

·the Union Civil Protection Mechanism in particular through benefiting from analytical and response capacities as well as implementing the Commission recommendation on disaster resilience goals;

·the Neighbourhood, Development and International Cooperation Instrument programme supporting international partnerships to enhance maritime security, in particular maritime situational awareness;

·the Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance (2021-2017), IPA III, given its scope and focus on candidate countries;

·the Common Foreign and Security Policy budget to fund civilian CSDP missions;

·the European Maritime, Fisheries and Aquaculture Fund (EMFAF) to fund maritime surveillance and cooperation on coast guard function;

·the European Regional Development and Fund (ERDF) and Interreg programmes supporting investments in coastal and outermost regions and territoritories and in countries sharing maritime borders with the EU;

·the Internal Security Funds that fund the Maritime Analysis and Operations Centre – Narcotics (MAOC-N) and its specific capabilities to exchange information to tackle drug trafficking at sea.

VI.Way forward

The Commission and the High Representative will work together with the Council to implement this updated strategy in the areas of action identified above and detailed in the action plan, building on achievements of the EUMSS since 2014, using existing instruments and policies, and following the overall guidance of the Strategic Compass.

The Commission and the High Representative invite the Member States to endorse the strategy and action plan. Three years after the strategy is endorsed by the Council, the Commission and the High Representative will submit to the Council a joint progress report with contributions from the Member States.

(1)
JOIN(2022)28 final

(2)
https://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/IDAN/2022/702557/EXPO_IDA(2022)702557_EN.pdf

(3)
COM(2021) 240 final.

(4)
Council document 11205/14 and Council conclusions10494/18.

(5)
Council conclusions 9946/21.

(6)
  https://eunavfor.eu/  

(7)
  https://www.operationirini.eu/  

(8)
Council Conclusions 06256/22 and 06255/22.

(9)
Council document 7371/22.

(10)
The EU Threat Analysis is a comprehensive and intelligence-based analysis of the range of threats and challenges the EU is facing or might face in the future. It is regularly updated and serves as background information to help develop and implement the EU Strategic Compass for Security and Defence.

(11)
IPCC SROCC (2019) and WGII report, AR6 (2022).

(12)
COM(2020) 380 final

(13)
Notably, an alarming increase in cetacean mortality in the Black Sea.

(14)
2023/C 20/01

(15)
COM(2023)61 final and 2023/C 56/01.

(16)
Unexploded ordnance (UXO) refers to explosive weapons (bombs, shells, grenades, land mines, naval mines, cluster munition, and other munitions) that did not explode and still pose a risk of detonation, sometimes many decades after they were used or discarded.

(17)
https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/rulesneg_e/fish_e/fish_e.htm

(18)
For example, undersea cables and pipelines, logistical hubs (i.e. ports), offshore renewable energy installations, offshore oil and gas oil platforms, etc.

(19)
Maritime domain awareness is the effective understanding of activity associated with the maritime domain that could impact the security, safety, economy, or environment of the European Union and its Member States. On the basis of clearly defined user needs and rights, it assists the authorities responsible for monitoring and surveillance activities in preventing and managing in a comprehensive way all such situations, events and actions related to the EU maritime domain. The EU maritime domain encompasses the EU Member States' Territorial waters, Exclusive Economic Zones and Continental Platforms as defined by the 1982 United Nations Convention on Law of the Sea as well as all maritime-related activities carried out therein, on the seabed, subsurface, surface and above the sea such as installations, cargo, small boats and vessels flagged, owned, managed by or bound to the EU.

(20)
The ‘integrated approach to external conflicts and crises’ draws from the 2016 EU Global Strategy (Council Conclusions: EUCO 26/16 and 13202/16) and was endorsed by the 2018 Council Conclusions (5413/18). It identifies a framework for a more coherent and holistic engagement by the EU to external conflicts and crises and promotes human security and thereby also increases the security of the EU and its citizens.

(21)
Such as the Comprehensive Strategy with Africa (JOIN(2020) 4 final), the EU Strategy on the Gulf of Guinea (7671/14), the EU Strategy for the Indo-Pacific (JOIN(2021) 24 final), the EU policy on the Arctic (JOIN(2021) 27 final), the Strategy on the Outermost regions COM(2022).

(22)
https://www.diplomatie.gouv.fr/en/french-foreign-policy/europe/news/article/european-maritime-awareness-in-the-soh-emasoh-political-statement-by-the

(23)
COM(2022) 303

(24)
The key EU actions listed under each of the six specific objectives summarize prominent elements of actions presented in detail in the action plan.

(25)
International Maritime Organization of the United Nations

(26)
African Union

(27)
Maritime security has long been a shared priority for both the EU and ASEAN. Cooperation between the two regions has focused on responding to transnational maritime threats such as piracy, smuggling, illegal. immigration, disaster risks and the impacts of pollution and climate change. The European Union supports the ASEAN-led process towards a Code of Conduct in the South China Sea; https://euinasean.eu/maritime-cooperation/

(28)
Maritime Security in Eastern and Southern Africa and Indian Ocean (MASE), Port Security and Safety of Navigation Programme, Regional Programme for Maritime Security in the Red Sea Area, and CRIMARIO.

(29)
SWAIMS, PASSMAR and GOGIN actions.

(30)
Maritime information fusion centres are national or regional entities that collect information to enhance maritime situational awareness in a given geographical area. In 2022, the EU deployed its first liaison officer to the Information Fusion Centre in Singapore, which covers most of the Indo-Pacific region.

(31)
In accordance with the Council Recommendation 2023/C 20/01 on a Union-wide coordinated approach to strengthen the resilience of critical infrastructure.

(32)
in accordance with the International Ship and Port Facility Security Code; https://www.imo.org/en/OurWork/Security/Pages/SOLAS-XI-2%20ISPS%20Code.aspx

(33)
Maritime sectors include safety and security of maritime transport, fisheries control, marine pollution preparedness and response, protection of marine environment, customs, border control, general law enforcement and defence.

(34)
E.g. Eurosur and SafeSeaNet (operational systems at EU level).

(35)
Council Document 9946-2021

(36)
SWD (2019) 322 final

(37)
  https://defence-industry-space.ec.europa.eu/welcome-iris2-infrastructure-resilience-interconnectivity-and-security-satellite-2022-11-17_en

(38)
  EU Civil Protection Mechanism (europa.eu)

(39)
  Emergency Response Coordination Centre (ERCC) (europa.eu)

(40)
The European Commission is funding CRIMARIO with EUR 23 million between 2015 and 2025.

(41)
The IORIS and the SHARE.IT platforms.

(42)
The European Commission is funding GOGIN with EUR 11.5 million (2016-2023), and GOGIN II with EUR 5 million (2023-2025).

(43)
JOIN(2021) 27 final

(44)
In line with the MSP Directive, 2014/89/EU

(45)
The ‘Symbiosis’ project ongoing under the co-ordination of the European Defence Agency, with Horizon 2020 funds; https://eda.europa.eu/symbiosis

(46)
COM(2020) 741 final

(47)
Directive (EU) 2022/2557

(48)
Directive (EU) 2022/2555

(49)
 Projects to clean the Baltic Sea from chemical warfare and conventional munitions supported by the Interreg programme financed by the Euopean Regional Development Fund (ERDF) - 10 years of Interreg cooperation to free the Baltic Sea from dumped munitions - Interreg Baltic Sea Region (interreg-baltic.eu)

(50)
 Regulation (EU) 2019/452

(51)
Join(2021)27 final

(52)
The Capability Development Plan, the collaborative opportunities identified under the Coordinated Annual Review on Defence, the Permanent Structured Cooperation, the European Defence Fund.

(53)
EDA’s Steering Board of June 2022 formally launched the revision of the Capability Development Plan.

(54)
Focus area ‘European Patrol Class Surface Ships’.

(55)
The aim of the EDF is to strengthen the competitiveness and innovation capacity of the defence industry in the EU. It therefore contributes to developing the military capabilities of the Member States.

(56)
The ESDC, in the context of the Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP), provides EU–level training and education, in the field of the Union’s Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP). It aims to develop and promote a common understanding of CSDP among civilian and military personnel, and to identify and disseminate, through its training activities, good practices in relation to various CSDP issues. By doing so, the ESDC complements the national efforts in the field of training and education.

(57)
Including as part of the Year of Skills.

(58)
http://www.emilyo.eu/ ; EMILYO is not linked to the Erasmus+ Programme.


european flagEUROPEAN COMMISSION

Brussels, 10.3.2023

JOIN(2023) 8 final

ANNEX
to the

Joint Communication to the European Parliament and the Council

on the update of the EU Maritime Security Strategy and its Action Plan



"An enhanced EU Maritime Security Strategy for evolving maritime threats"


Action Plan 1  

Strategic Objective 1. Step up activities at sea

Objectives

Actions

Timeline
Where applicable

Concerned Actors 2

1.1. Expand the role and actions of the EU in the sea basins around the EU and overseas.

Strengthen EU CSDP naval operations and expand the Coordinated Maritime Presences (CMP) concept

1.1.1

Provide EU CSDP naval operations (including Atalanta an Irini) with the naval and air assets listed in their respective combined joint statements of requirements.

2025

MS, EEAS

1.1.2

Consider new maritime areas of interest in which to implement the CMP, based on proposals from the EEAS.

As of 2023

MS, EEAS

Develop cooperation and synergies between MS-led and EU initiatives on maritime security

1.1.3

Step up cooperation between EUNAVFOR Operation Atalanta and the European Maritime Awareness Mission in the Strait of Hormuz (EMASOH).

As of 2023

MS, EEAS

1.1.4

Ensure overall coherence and coordination of EU MS actions with those of relevant Commission and HR services and agencies, including through the CMP.

On a rolling basis

MS, COM, EEAS

1.1.5

Support action with EUROSUR Fusion services and information exchange capabilities, such as those available through CISE and IMS, and coordinate monitoring activities in pre-frontier areas.

On a rolling basis

Frontex, EMSA

1.1.6

Support the creation of maritime staff operators courses (MSCO) in MS by providing training and access to EUROSUR capabilities and services.

1.1.7

Ensure that EU action at sea and on land is complementary with the EU Integrated Approach by promoting links with inter-agency cooperation on coast guard functions (Tripartite Working Arrangement) and a Multipurpose Maritime Operation concept developed under the EU cooperation on coast guard functions and implemented by coast guard authorities in the sea basins concerned.

As of 2023, on a rolling basis.

MS, COM, EEAS, EFCA, EMSA, Frontex

1.1.8

Promote synergies, where appropriate and legally feasible, between CSDP activities and Multipurpose Maritime Operation concepts developed in the framework of inter-agency cooperation on coast guard functions.

As of 2023, on a rolling basis.

MS, COM, EEAS, EFCA, EMSA, Frontex

In relevant sea basins around the EU

1.1.9

Organise an annual EU naval exercise, involving navies and related authorities from as many MS as possible to boost preparedness and response capabilities to traditional threats as well as to the risks and threats listed in Strategic Objective 4.

Annually, as of 2024

MS, EEAS

1.1.10

Streamline maritime security in the work on sea basin strategies and on macro-regional strategies, where relevant.

As of 2023, on a rolling basis.

COM

Arctic

1.1.11

Ensure sufficient satellite observation of the new Arctic Sea routes, including through Copernicus capabilities (including its marine service – CMEMS 3 ), to enhance situational awareness.

By 2025

COM, EMSA

1.1.12

Participate in the work of the Arctic Council and related fora, as appropriate.

On a rolling basis.

MS, EEAS, COM

Atlantic

1.1.13

Support anti-drug-trafficking operations by exchanging information and running joint operations, including at departing countries/ ports and destination EU ports and port facilities

As of 2023, on a rolling basis.

MS, COM, MAOC-N, EMSA, EUROPOL

Baltic Sea

1.1.14

Set up a mechanism involving the COM, the Council of Baltic Sea States (CBSS) and HELCOM to coordinate scientific actions, operations, and data sharing to implement a plan of action for tackling UXO in the Baltic Sea.

By the end of 2023

MS, COM, EEAS

1.1.15

Develop a tool at regional level to allow the sharing of data on munitions, conduct a risk assessment and identify the best ways to remove conventional and chemical munitions from the Baltic Sea.

By the end of 2023

MS, COM, EEAS

1.1.16

Develop and scale up technologies to tackle UXO, also involving civilian entities, and promoting links with industry.

As of 2024, on a rolling basis.

MS, COM, EEAS

1.1.17

Set up a regular campaign aiming at cleaning the Baltic Sea Region of dumped munitions, to protect the marine environment, ensure security of sea lanes and facilitate the development of maritime economic activities.

As of 2024, on a rolling basis.

MS, COM, EEAS

Black Sea

1.1.18

Enhance the capacities for coordinated response to marine pollution related to armed conflicts, including by developing new training curricula to tackle pollution from various sources, including e.g. UXO, mines, oil leaks, sunken vessels, noise pollution etc., which might also affect biodiversity and ecosystems, also utilising Common Maritime Agenda (CMA) for the Black Sea and the Black Sea Strategic Research and Innovation Agenda (SRIA).

2023

MS, COM, EMSA

1.1.19

Analyse the impact of military activities in the context of the war in Ukraine, on cetaceans, through the work of ASCOBANS (Agreement on the Conservation of Small Cetaceans).

As of 2023

MS, COM, EEAS

1.1.20

Build on the existing capacities of SatCen and other EU services and to boost current capabilities to detect sea mines, including those deployed in the context of the Russian war of aggression against Ukraine, posing a risk to shipping and navigation.

As of 2023

MS, COM, SatCen

Mediterranean

1.1.21

Enhance capabilities of like-minded Mediterranean partner countries and share information, where appropriate, to enhance their ability to carry out border controls with the aim of detecting and preventing unauthorised border-crossings and cross-border criminal activities.

On a rolling basis

MS, COM, EEAS, Frontex

1.1.22

Enhance the coordination and synergies between Operation IRINI, EUBAM LIBYA and relevant European Agencies.

As of 2023

MS, COM, EEAS, Frontex, EMSA

1.1.23

In line with the UfM SBE Declaration 4 , the MedCGFF will develop training courses and facilitate the exchange of information, expertise, technical assistance, training and best practices among UfM countries to tackle illicit activities at sea.

On a rolling basis, as of 2024

MS, COM, Frontex, EMSA, EFCA

1.1.24

Identify and promote regional maritime capacity-building activities to expand existing maritime security capacity-building programmes (e.g. the Rabat Process) and develop similar initiatives with partner countries and regional organisations.

On a rolling basis, as of 2024

MS, EEAS

1.1.25

Implement GFCM Recommendations/International Inspection Scheme/Pilot Projects to improve the sustainability of fisheries resources, to support the fight against IUU

On a rolling basis

MS, COM, EFCA

North Sea

1.1.26

Carry out a comprehensive mapping exercise of the North Sea basin in order to conduct a risk assessment and identify the best ways to remove conventional and chemical munitions.

By the end of 2025

COM, MS

In areas where CMP is implemented

1.1.27

Step up the fight against illegal and illicit activities at sea, including drug trafficking, in the context of CMP

On a rolling basis

MS, EEAS

Gulf of Guinea

1.1.28

Maintain support for the Yaoundé Architecture for maritime security, including through the Gulf of Guinea Regional Information Network (GoGIN) programme and improve the rule of law and national legal frameworks in the region, including through the ongoing SWAIMS and PASSMAR programmes, until their completion in 2024, and subsequently through the successor regional programme on maritime security, as well as WeCAPS and GoGIN.

Rolling basis

MS, COM, EEAS, EMSA

1.1.29

Reinforce coherence between EU institutions and EU MS actions, in particular through the implementation the CMP in the Gulf of Guinea.

Ongoing

MS, EEAS

Indo-Pacific

1.1.30

Improve information sharing mechanisms and enable connections between maritime information fusion centres by developing and expanding the use of CRIMARIO’s IORIS platform and the SHARE.IT initiative.

MS, COM, EEAS

1.1.31

Conduct joint exercises and port calls with Indo-Pacific partners, preferably using IORIS as a collaborative tool.

As of 2024

MS, COM, EEAS

1.1.32

Ensure coherence of EU MS actions with those of relevant Commission and HR services and agencies, including through the CMP in the North-western Indian Ocean.

As of 2023

1.1.33

Step up cooperation on maritime security with international and regional organisations, in particular the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), including seeking to obtain the status of Dialogue Partner in the Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA).

As of 2023

1.1.34

Continue supporting the maritime security architecture in the Western Indian Ocean based on the MASE programme and on the Djibouti Code of Conduct through the upcoming regional programme on maritime security in sub-Saharan Africa.

As of 2024

1.2 Promote respect of International Law and fight against illicit activities at sea

Promote compliance with the UNCLOS and other international instruments related to maritime security

1.2.1

Encourage the signature and ratification of international instruments related to maritime security, notably UNCLOS, and promote compliance, and sharing of best practices with coastal states and partners in implementing international law relevant for maritime security in relevant fora.

Rolling basis as of 2023

MS, COM, EEAS,

1.2.2

Cooperate with partners countries to share best practices and confidence-building measures to help implement international law in relations with such partner countries.

Rolling basis as of 2023

MS, COM, EEAS

Promote and develop aspects of maritime security under the IMO and EU legal frameworks

1.2.3

Cooperate with partner countries to tackle maritime security issues by ensuring, for instance, compliance with IMO legal instruments, in particular to implement the International Ship and Port Facility Security (ISPS) Code.

Rolling basis

MS, COM, EMSA

1.2.4

Promote and develop COM MARSEC guidelines, including guidelines on cybersecurity, in line with IMO regulations, to promote port and ship security control functions.

Rolling basis

MS, COM, EMSA

1.2.5

Implement, maintain a sufficient number of Commission maritime security inspections as a regular annual activity (to monitor the application of EU Maritime Security legislation in MS); continue to explore ways to enhance maritime security in domains like passenger ships or cyber-security.

Rolling basis

MS, COM, EMSA

Support the fight against illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing (IUU) in line with the EU consolidated approach and best practices.

1.2.6

Continue to support MS in joint and fisheries control operations while implementing EFCA joint deployment plans to enable the permanent exchange of information and intelligence and control activities, planned on the basis of risk assessment results.

Rolling basis, ongoing

MS, COM, EFCA, EMSA

1.2.7

Promote inter-agency cooperation, including exchange of data, to improve monitoring, control and surveillance and to support fisheries authorities (including national and regional fisheries monitoring centres), in enforcing applicable regional and national legislation.

Ongoing

MS, COM, EFCA, EMSA, FRONTEX

1.2.8

Support MS coast guard and naval forces in providing services in relevant RFMOs convention areas, to ensure the safety and security of seafarers, fishing vessels and fleets (e.g., from piracy), and to better control and eliminate forced and severe labour abuses at sea.

Rolling basis, as of 2023

MS, COM

1.2.9

Take action to control and eliminate forced and severe labour abuses at sea.

Rolling basis, as of 2023

MS, COM

Strengthening border controls and combating cross-border criminal activities such as smuggling migrants or goods, and trafficking of human beings, with emphasis on remote parts of the EU which are particularly affected by migration pressure

1.2.10

Develop a coherent and robust response to counter the instrumentalisation of migration by sea and to deter, dismantle and prosecute criminal networks smuggling migrants and trafficking human beings.

As of 2023

MS, COM, EEAS, Frontex, Europol, Eurojust

1.2.11

Taking advantage of the full implementation of EBCG Regulation 5  and the structured cooperation between relevant actors (e.g. EUROPOL, INTERPOL, UNODC and MAOC-N), and in view of supporting the activities of the Union Civil Protection Mechanism (UCPM), enhance risk analysis to identify maritime areas and ports to be monitored, as well as vessels and aircraft to be tracked, for the purposes of combatting irregular immigration or cross-border criminal activities and networks.

As of 2024

MS, COM, EMSA, Frontex

1.2.12

Create and maintain an EU situational picture including the pre-frontier area, based on information exchange, risk analysis and pro-active aerial surveillance and patrolling.

As of 2024

MS, Frontex

Strategic Objective 2. Cooperate with partners

Objectives

Actions

Timeline
Where applicable

Concerned Actors

2.1 Boost cooperation with like-minded and strategic partners

Boost cooperation with like-minded and strategic partners

2.1.1

Increase EU participation in SHADE mechanisms in the maritime domain. Participate in the work of G7++FOGG (Friends of the Gulf of Guinea) and its sub working groups. Participate in the work of in the work of GoG SHADE and its sub working groups.

On a rolling basis, as of 2023

MS, EEAS, COM

2.1.2

Enhance dialogue and cooperation with third countries and international partners on maritime security issues of common interest such as surveillance and protection of critical maritime infrastructure

As of 2023

MS, EEAS, COM

2.1.3

Support partner countries in building their capabilities for maritime governance, rule of law and their military and naval capabilities, including through the use of the European Peace Facility.

As of 2023

MS, COM, EEAS

Enhance cooperation and increase operational interactions with all partners at sea

2.1.4

Deploy EU liaison officers in regional maritime information fusion centres in maritime areas of interest, to facilitate the exchange of information and cooperation between the EU and its partners and, where appropriate, to evaluate the feasibility of a direct connection of these fusion centres with relevant EU maritime surveillance systems

As of 2023

MS, EEAS

2.1.5

Promote the use of IORIS/YARIS platforms by MS naval assets deployed in CMP for external communication and in exercises with coastal states and partners.

On a rolling basis, as of 2023

MS, EEAS, EDA

2.1.6

Set up civilian collaborative tools between maritime operations carried out by EU MS and EU Agencies.

As of 2024

MS, COM, EEAS, EDA, EMSA, EUROPOL

Mainstream maritime security into relations with partner countries and regional organisations

2.1.7

Develop links with partner countries and regional organisations by engaging in joint projects related to maritime security and safety, as appropriate.

As of 2023

MS, COM, EEAS

2.1.8

Develop coast guard cooperation in the framework of existing or upcoming working arrangements and status agreements with partner countries, including for strengthening patrolling of maritime borders and pre-frontier areas.

As of 2023

MS, EEAS, Frontex

2.2 Work with non-EU partners to step up maritime surveillance

Work with non-EU partners on interoperability solutions for sharing maritime surveillance information

2.2.1

Support the Djibouti Code of Conduct countries by creating National Maritime Information Sharing Centres and improving their maritime surveillance capabilities.

Cover 50% of the countries by end 2024 and 100% by end of 2026

COM, EEAS

2.2.2

Improve information exchange with partner countries in the framework of EUROSUR, and via the activation of specific situational pictures (Article 27 of the EBCG 2.0 Regulation).

By the end of 2024

MS, COM, EEAS, EDA, Frontex

Strengthen maritime security architectures and inter-agency cooperation in sea basins and maritime areas of strategic interest

2.2.3

Support maritime capacity building and enhance maritime domain awareness in the Indo-Pacific region through MASE, until its completion in December 2023, and subsequently through the successor regional programme on maritime security, starting in 2024, as well as the CRIMARIO programmes, including the IORIS platform.

On a rolling basis

COM, EEAS

2.2.4

Support implementation of the Yaoundé maritime security architecture in the Gulf of Guinea region through the Gulf of Guinea Interregional Network, especially the YARIS platform.

COM, EEAS

2.3 Enhance cooperation at bilateral and multilateral level

Enhance cooperation at bilateral and multilateral levels

2.3.1

Build upon the Joint Declarations to deepen dialogue with NATO on strands of maritime cooperation (under the framework of the common set of proposals endorsed by the EU and NATO).

As of 2023

MS, EEAS, EDA

2.3.2

Strengthen cooperation with the IMO and Regional Sea Conventions to counter threats of intentional, unlawful acts that could affect ships and port facilities globally.

As of 2024

MS, COM, EMSA, HELCOM, OSPAR, Barcelona Convention

Strategic Objective 3. Lead in maritime domain awareness

Objectives

Actions

Timeline
Where applicable

Concerned Actors

3.1. Enhance the EU’s maritime domain awareness

Ensure secure and rapid information exchange between all related sectors and systems across the EU and EFTA

3.1.1

Launch the CISE operational phase, including implementation of the CISE classified network.

As of 2024

MS, COM, EMSA 6  

3.1.2

Encourage/incentivise Member States in specific coast guard and military authorities to join the CISE community.

On a rolling basis, as of 2023

COM, EMSA

3.1.3

Use CISE to exchange maritime surveillance information, to boost resilience and protect critical maritime infrastructure (e.g. subsea cables, pipelines, and offshore renewable sites).

As of 2024

MS, COM, EDA, SatCen, EMSA

3.1.4

Consider the use of CISE to exchange information in the context of the inter-agency cooperation, in complement to the networks already in place.

On a rolling basis, once CISE is operational.

MS, EFCA, EMSA and FRONTEX

ECGFF

3.1.5

Explore the possibility of setting up a programme on MSA for defence, whilst ensuring synchronisation with relevant civil stakeholders.

By 2024

MS, EDA

Strengthening information sharing between civil and military maritime authorities

3.1.6

Strengthen MARSUR and ensure operational information exchange between the MARSUR Network and CISE (including classified and unclassified information).

End of 2024

COM, EMSA, EDA, SatCen, MS

Enhance maritime surveillance and information exchange, using space-based capabilities, RPAS and other emerging technologies, including for the protection of external EU borders

3.1.7

Enable the exchange of relevant information between space-based capabilities and maritime surveillance instruments, including CISE and MARSUR.

End of 2024

MS, COM, EMSA, EDA, ESA, SatCen

3.1.8

Make full use of the existing and future capabilities and services of the EU space programmes, including the Earth Observation component (Copernicus, including its marine service - CMEMS), Galileo (and its threat response system) and EGNOS, as well as IRIS 7 , including for the purposes of maritime surveillance, monitoring of the marine environment and climate change.

As of 2023

MS, COM, EEAS, EMSA, EFCA, SatCen

3.1.9

Promote space R&I for maritime surveillance applications, including through the participation of key players and industry, along with the EU Satellite Centre and the Copernicus Security Strategic Research Agenda.

As of 2023

MS, COM, EMSA, Frontex, SatCen

3.1.10

Improve the integration of space-based technology with remotely piloted aircraft systems as well as radar stations, maritime patrol aircraft, and seaborne (manned and unmanned) means by using innovative, cyber-resilient tools.

On a rolling basis as of 2023

MS, EMSA, Frontex, SatCen

3.1.11

Step up surveillance by coastal and offshore patrol vessels and complement this with digitally networked high-end naval platforms, including unmanned platforms.

Pilot to be implemented by 2025

MS, COM, EEAS, EDA, Frontex

3.1.12

Member States to systematically make use of innovative solutions (technology and knowledge) resulting from EU civil security R&I on maritime security funded under the Border and External Security calls of Horizon 2020, as well as relevant calls under Horizon Europe.

As of 2023

MS

3.1.13

Consider deploying stationary radar, optical satellite and hyperspectral devices in strategic locations, to help MS better detect and identify maritime security threats.

As of 2023

MS

3.1.14

In the framework of the European Coast Guard Functions Forum and the Mediterranean Coast Guard Functions Forum, contribute to bolstering maritime domain awareness and EU and international cooperation through the exchange of best practices.

As of 2023

MS, EEAS, COM, EFCA, EMSA, FRONTEX

Development of Maritime Surveillance Capabilities

3.1.15

Development of the design of equipment and systems such as a small satellite mission to be implemented in the frame of a constellation, coastal radar networks, unmanned semi-fixed platforms at sea.

As of 2023

COM, MS

3.1.16

Promote Maritime Surveillance Capabilities development of a Naval Collaborative Surveillance capability.

As of 2024

COM, MS

3.2 Work with relevant non-EU partners on interoperability solutions for sharing maritime surveillance information

Work with relevant non-EU partners on interoperability solutions for sharing maritime surveillance information

3.2.1

Support maritime capacity building and heighten maritime domain awareness in the Indo-Pacifc region through MASE, until its completion in December 2023, and subsequently through the successor regional programme on maritime security, starting in 2024, as well as the CRIMARIO programmes, including the IORIS platform.

On a rolling basis

COM, EEAS

3.2.2

Support implementation of the Yaoundé maritime security architecture in the Gulf of Guinea region through the Gulf of Guinea Interregional Network, especially the YARIS platform.

COM, EEAS

Strategic objective 4. Manage risks and threats

Objectives

Actions

Timeline
Where applicable

Concerned Actors

4.1

Further develop awareness and preparedness to tackle threats linked to climate change and environmental degradation



4.1.1

Strengthen coordination and intervention capabilities in the event of incidents and disasters at sea, with due consideration for EMSA-hosted systems and for the Union Civil Protection Mechanism, and by strengthening and/or developing an integrated approach and rapid reaction to manage maritime incidents.

By the end of 2023

MS, COM, EEAS, EDA, EMSA

4.1.2

Increase knowledge on the effects of climate change, sea level rise, storm surges, and environmental degradation on maritime security and address related risks and threats.

On a rolling basis, as of 2023.

COM, EEAS, MS, EDA, SatCen

4.1.3

Strengthen maritime domain awareness, early warning and strategic foresight on the effects of climate change and environmental degradation on maritime security, including by facilitating the collection and exchange of ocean observation data.

On a rolling basis, as of 2023.

COM, EEAS, MS, EDA, Frontex, SatCen

4.1.4

Expand training and exercises run by competent authorities to train in preparing for and responding to the effects of climate change and environmental degradation on maritime security.

On a rolling basis, as of 2024

MS, COM, EEAS

4.1.5

Contribute to the development of the Digital Twin of the Ocean (DTO), with the maritime security perspective, to address the mutual impacts of maritime security and of a changing environment and climate.

On a rolling basis, as of 2024

MS, COM

4.2 Increase the resilience and protection of critical maritime infrastructure (e.g. gas pipelines, power / communication cables, ports, offshore energy facilities, LNG terminals, and floating storage and regasification units), and maritime assets

Strengthen the resilience and protection of critical maritime infrastructure and maritime assets, mindful of regional specificities and threat levels, and encourage MS to carry out joint stress tests of critical infrastructure based on the common stress test principles developed at Union level

4.2.1

Draw up a risk assessment and contingency plans/disaster recovery plans (EU level/national level) for critical maritime infrastructure, without prejudice to the Directive on the Resilience of Critical Entities (e.g. on the risk assessment of critical entities in the transport sector and water transport subsector).

As of 2023

MS, COM, EEAS, EUMS; EDA, EMSA

4.2.2

Conduct stress tests for maritime infrastructure, based on Council recommendation 15623/22, using where applicable, the standards on stress test methodology for critical infrastructure (CI) developed under the INFRASTRESS project.

As of 2023

MS, COM, Frontex

4.2.3

Conduct regular, full-scale, live maritime exercises at EU level, focused inter alia on harbour protection, addressing cyber and hybrid threats, also involving the Union Civil Protection Mechanism, where appropriate.

Annual basis

MS, COM, EEAS, ECGFF, EDA, Frontex, ENISA

4.2.4

Step up cooperation between MS, with the support of relevant EU Agencies, to develop a regional permanent surveillance plan for underwater and offshore infrastructure, aiming at deterring terrorist action against such infrastructure. Step up cooperation on assessing incidents; cooperation between civil and military authorities, and on sharing assets and exchanging information for the protection of underwater and offshore infrastructure. 

As of 2024

MS, EDA, Frontex, EMSA

4.2.5

Develop/deploy specialised vessels and other means (RPAS, satellite imagery) to patrol and protect critical maritime infrastructure, including multi-role survey vessels.

Deploy existing means by the end of 2023.

Develop further means/assets by 2025.

MS, EDA, Frontex, SatCen

4.2.6

Conduct studies on the protection of critical maritime infrastructure, also to support the relevant CARD recommendations.

By 2025

MS, EDA

4.2.7

Strengthen the competences of national authorities on ship and port security, in accordance with SOLAS, the ISPS Code, Regulation 725/2004 8 and 2005/65/EC 9 .

On a rolling basis, as of 2023.

MS, EMSA

4.3 Enhance cyber security

Assess cyber risks and identify suitable security measures

4.3.1

Consider developing further guidance to the maritime sector, particularly on ports in the context of the NIS2 Directive.

As of 2024

MS, COM

4.3.2

Further develop common cyber-surveillance capabilities for maritime administrations / coast guard authorities.

Develop the maritime sector’s ability to face cyber threats by encouraging the exchange of best practices and the development of guidance between maritime actors, as well as further addressing cyber issues in the security and safety domains at the level of the International Maritime Organisation (IMO).

As of 2024

MS, COM

4.3.3

Develop cooperation on cybersecurity in the maritime domain with like-minded non-EU countries, at bilateral or multilateral level.

As of 2023

MS, COM, ENISA

4.3.4

Improve the resilience of maritime administrations by running regular training sessions on cybersecurity crisis management, and develop a culture of joint incident reaction, including radio frequency interference.

On a rolling basis, as of 2024.

MS, COM, ENISA, EMSA, Frontex

4.3.5

Improve knowledge on cybersecurity and further develop a complete mapping exercise for cybersecurity in shipping to identify responsibilities.

As of 2024

MS, COM, EMSA, ENISA

4.4 Strengthen the EU’s resilience and improve response to interference and manipulation of information, and other hybrid threats concerning maritime security

Tackle foreign and domestic interference and manipulation of information, and other hybrid threats related to the maritime domain

4.4.1

Implement maritime-related counter narratives, including by providing operational authorities (Ops Commanders) with the delegation of powers needed to tackle disinformation and implement counteractions.

As of 2023

MS, EEAS and EU naval operations

4.4.2

Promote EU coast guard cooperation on tackling hybrid threats in the maritime domain.

On a rolling basis, as of 2023.

MS, EMSA, Frontex, Coast guard fora

4.5 Assess the potential security impacts of foreign direct investment in maritime infrastructure

4.5.1

Assess investment in maritime infrastructure by non-EU entities in the context of the EU cooperation mechanism on the basis of Regulation (EU) 2019/452 10 . 

Ongoing

MS, COM

4.6 Develop a comprehensive response to UXO in the sea basins around the EU

4.6.1

Building on UXO-related pilot activities carried out in the Baltic Sea, draw up a comprehensive plan for sea basins around the EU to map the type, location and quantity of UXO and chemicals from military activities, as part of the effort to minimise their environmental impact, ensure security of sea lanes and facilitate the development of maritime economic activities.

As of 2023

MS, COM

4.7 Step up action to prepare for acts of terrorism, unlawful acts, threats to freedom of navigation and hybrid threats

4.7.1

Implement sufficient maritime security inspections and ensure that ships, ports and port facilities in the EU are properly secured and protected, in accordance with applicable international and EU legislation.

Ongoing on an annual basis

MS, COM

4.7.2

Conclude the COM risk assessment on improving passenger ship security, to identify solutions to counter shared risks and threats to passenger ship security in the EU.

Ongoing

COM

4.7.3

Conduct a study to map undersea communication cable infrastructures, related capacities and redundancies, vulnerabilities, threats and risks to service availability, the impact of downtime of undersea cables for Member States and the Union as a whole, as well as risk mitigation, and propose recommendations to ensure a higher resilience/redundancy, if needed.

As of 2023

MS, COM

4.8 Strengthen the capacity to contribute to the fight against organised and serious international threats and illicit activities to increase the EU’s internal security

4.8.1

Improve and increase the capacity of MS, with the support of concerned agencies, to prevent, detect and combat illegal trafficking performed through sea transport, or at sea (such as environmental crimes, trafficking of arms and narcotics, smuggling of migrants and trafficking of human beings, IUU, etc.), notably by developing actions in the framework of EMPACT.

As of 2023

MS, EFCA, EMSA, Frontex, COM, EUROPOL

4.8.2

Explore the possibility to further use passenger information provided by maritime transport operators, considering existing international, EU and national rules, to enhance security at the external borders and within the EU.

As of 2023

MS, COM, Frontex, Europol

Strategic Objective 5. Enhance capabilities

Objectives

Actions

Timeline
Where applicable

Concerned Actors

5.1 Develop the capabilities necessary to ensure EU surface superiority

Strengthen future surface capabilities and tackle the shortfalls in strategic enablers

5.1.1

Implement the CARD Focus Area European Patrol Class Surface Ships.

By 2025

MS, EDA

5.1.2

Develop operational scenarios for force protection and common force protection requirements for European naval forces.

By 2025

MS, EDA

5.1.3

Initiate activities to increase the efficiency of propulsion, energy production, storage and management systems and logistics by implementing new technologies.

5.1.4

Support maritime military mobility by approving a technical arrangement for cross-border movement permission arrangements in the maritime domain.

5.1.5

Develop common requirements and specifications for future unmanned systems, ensuring that the systems are interoperable.

5.1.6

Provide support as requested by MS on PESCO projects, including the European Patrol Corvette.

5.1.7

Promote actual capability development and obtainment of the First of Class ship of a European Patrol Corvette

As of 2023

MS, COM

5.1.8

Promote actual capability development of a medium-size semi-autonomus surface vessel with modular mission payloads

By 2024

MS, COM

5.1.9

Promote the development of future naval capabilities, i.e. a functional smart system of systems for naval future platforms

By 2025

MS, COM

5.1.10

Promote actual capability development of a Naval Collaborative Engagement based on the Naval Collaborative Surveillance

By 2026

MS, COM

5.2 Strengthen underwater capabilities

Enhance EU underwater capabilities including mine countermeasures

5.2.1

Develop an EU concept of operations for mine countermeasures to support the decision-making process for the safe navigation and operation of marine vessels and unmanned systems, including utilisation of opportunities from the development and research actions of the European Defence Fund.

By 2025

MS, COM, EDA

5.2.2

Continue developing targeted PESCO projects (DIVEPACK, EUNDDC and MAS MCM), and utilise the support of collaborative and joint research and development from the European Defence Fund and projects in its precursor programme, the European Defence Industrial Development Programme (EDIDP)

5.2.3

Improve anti-submarine warfare by boosting capabilities for submarine detection in terms of both technology and procedures.

By 2025

MS, EDA

5.2.4

Promote the development of technologies related to underwater manned-unmanned teaming swarming and underwater observation, detection, adquisition and communications.

As of 2023

COM, MS

5.2.5

Promote the technological developments and solutions for a first phase of the mine countermeasures stand-off concept.

By 2024

COM, MS

5.2.6

Promote the development of capabilities for securing critical seabed infrastructure as well as capabilities for combating underwater swarms consisting of heterogeneous unmanned underwater vehicles.

By 2024

COM, MS

5.2.7

Promote actual capability development of a heavy multi-purpose mine sweeping drone.

By 2025

COM, MS

5.3 Support European navies and coast guards in developing critical technologies and industrial capabilities

Identify technologies and research activities in response to capability needs, in line with the EDA’s Overarching Strategic Research Agenda

5.3.1

Promote research into innovative solutions on power generation, storage, management and distribution needed to meet high energy demands required by new systems.

By 2025

MS, COM, EDA

5.3.2

Increase autonomous coordination of manned-unmanned teaming, including swarm technologies.

5.3.3

Ensure the surveillance and protection of high-speed, resilient and robust underwater communication networks, with the involvement of industry and third countries where appropriate.

5.3.4

Research and integrate disruptive technologies including artificial intelligence, big data technologies and quantum technologies.

5.3.5

Research and develop common ship digital architecture and infrastructure.

5.3.6

Increase vessel automation by deploying resilient automated platforms and systems with reduced crew and decision support systems.

Identify and cooperatively address critical dependencies affecting the European defence technological and industrial base

5.3.7

By carrying out work on Key Strategic Activities, raise awareness and promote a common understanding of MS, EU institutions and defence industrial actors about existing shortages and gaps in terms of industrial and technological areas, as well as skills gaps that could undermine the EU’s freedom of action.

5.3.8

Promote cooperation among MS by developing projects funded by the European Defence Fund and promote joint procurement of naval capabilities, including through EDIRPA.

Align navy and coast guard activities with the objectives of the EU Green Deal.

5.3.9

Foster co-existence between offshore renewable energy projects and defence activities by implementing suitable solutions in maritime areas reserved or used for military activities, where suitability for deploying offshore renewable projects or other sustainable uses has been demonstrated.

By 2025

MS, COM, EEAS, EDA

5.3.10

Develop renewable technologies (renewable fuel, retrofit engines, electrification etc.), suitable for military use in the maritime domain.

Strategic Objective 6. Educate and train

Objectives

Actions

Timeline
Where applicable

Concerned Actors

6.1

Share education, training and skills across sectors, MS, and partner countries

6.1.1

Build on the work carried out by the agencies (EFCA, EMSA, Frontex) to develop capacity and specialised training under the tripartite working arrangement to organise cross-sectoral maritime security training on law enforcement, military, border control, coast guards, cyber security, protection of critical maritime infrastructure etc.

As of 2023

MS, EFCA, EMSA, Frontex, ECGFF

6.1.2

Promote the participation of women in educational and training in maritime security.

As of 2023

MS, COM, EEAS

6.1.3

Foster cooperation and training, including in the context of the ECGFF, with MS and NATO-accredited centres, centres of excellence etc.

MS, EEAS, EFCA, EMSA, Frontex

6.1.4

Develop a military international naval semester in the framework of the ‘European initiative for the exchange of young officers’ (EMILYO – Military Erasmus 11 ). 

As of 2023

MS, EEAS (ESDC)

6.1.5

Conduct joint exercises with non-EU partners to boost interoperability.

As of 2023

MS, COM, EEAS

6.2 Capitalise on the work carried out by agencies and fora

6.2.1

Continue ad hoc participation in the COASTEX exercise based on MS planning, improve and diversify COASTEX and regularly carry out relevant activities in the sea basins around the EU.

Ongoing

MS, EFCA, EMSA, Frontex, ECGFF

6.2.2

Carry out capacity building activities while implementing MMO in selected sea basins around the EU, at the request of MS and building on the work of EMSA, EFCA and FRONTEX.

Ongoing

MS, EFCA, EMSA, Frontex

6.2.3

Share the lessons learnt from running the Sectoral Qualification Framework for coast guards and provide guidance, assistance and support in implementing good practices, including on cyber security.

On a rolling basis

MS, EFCA, EMSA, Frontex

6.3. Strengthen cyber and hybrid security skills and curricula in the maritime domain

6.3.1

Take advantage of the knowledge and training provided by the HCoE Helsinki, including their maritime security work strand, also on the basis of the HCoE Handbook on Maritime Hybrid Threats 12 .

Ongoing

MS, COM, EEAS, HCoE

6.3.2

Strengthen cyber-, hybrid- and space-related security skills by supporting targeted training courses on cyber and digital skills for the maritime domain.

As of 2023

MS, COM, EMSA

6.3.3

Boost cyber and hybrid security skills through targeted curricula to be developed by competent institutions and/or authorities of the Member States, mindful that EMSA has been tasked by Member States and the European Commission to develop a course on maritime cybersecurity for 2023. 

As of 2023

MS, COM, EMSA

6.4 Capacity building

6.4.1

Conduct targeted training programmes open to non-EU partners to tackle existing and emerging threats to maritime security.

Ongoing

MS, COM, EEAS, EMSA, FRONTEX, ECGFF

Promote educational and training activities in partner countries to attract women to relevant sectors, including coast guard functions, also involving relevant EU agencies.

6.4.2

Further develop the military international naval semester, including a young officers’ exchange scheme.

As of 2023

MS, EEAS

6.4.3

Conduct civil-military exercises based on scenarios involving shared jurisdiction or shared use of capabilities.

As of 2023

GLOSSARY OF ABBREVIATIONS

A

ASEAN: Association of Southeast Asian Nations

B

C

CARD: Coordinated Annual Review on Defence

CIS: Critical Infrastructure

CISE: Common Information Sharing Environment

COM: European Commission Services

Copernicus: European Earth Observation Programme

CRIMARIO: Critical Maritime Routes Indo-Pacific

CSDP: Common Security and Defence Policy

D

DTO: digital twin of the ocean

E

EBCGA/Frontex: European Border and Coast Guard Agency

ECGFA: European Coast Guard Functions Academy

ECGFF: European Coast Guard Functions Forum

EDA: European Defence Agency

EDIRPA: European Defence Industry Reinforcement through common Procurement Act

EEAS: European External Action Service

EFCA: European Fisheries Control Agency

EGNOS: European Geostationary Navigation Overlay Service

EMPACT: European Multidisciplinary Platform Against Criminal Threats

EMSA: European Maritime Safety Agency

ENISA: European Union Agency for Cybersecurity

EU: European Union

EUBAM Libya: EU Border Assistance Mission in Libya

EUMSS: European Union Maritime Security Strategy

EUNAVFOR: European Union-led naval force

EUROPOL: European Police Agency

EUROSUR: European Border Surveillance System

G

GALILEO: European Satellite Navigation System

H

HCoE: European Centre of Excellence for Countering Hybrid Threats, Helsinki

HELCOM: Helsinki Commission - Baltic Marine Environment Protection Commission

I

IMO: International Maritime Organisation

INTERPOL: International Criminal Police Organisation

IORA: Indian Ocean Rim Association

ISPS Code: International Ship and Port Facility Security Code

IUU fishing: illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing

K

M

MAOC (N): Maritime Analysis and Operations Centre (Narcotics)

MARSUR: Defence project on maritime surveillance

MASE: Programme to Promote Regional Maritime Security

MAS MCM: Maritime (semi-) Autonomous Systems for Mine Countermeasures

MDA: maritime domain awareness

MedCGFF: Mediterranean Coast Guard Functions Forum

MS: Member States

MSCO: Maritime Staff Operators Course

N

NATO: North Atlantic Treaty Organisation

NIS Directive: Directive concerning measures for a high common level of security of network and

information systems across the Union

O

OSPAR: Oslo Paris Commission

OSRA: Overarching Strategic Research Agenda

P

PASSMAR project: The support program for the maritime safety and security strategy in Central Africa

PESCO: Permanent Structured Cooperation

R

RFMOs: Regional Fisheries Management Organisations

RPAS: Remotely Piloted Aircraft System

R&I: research and innovation

S

SAR: search and rescue activities

SatCen: European Union Satellite Centre

SHADE: Shared Awareness and Deconfliction

SOLAS: International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea

SWAIMS project: Support to West Africa Integrated Maritime Security

U

UN: United Nations

UNCLOS: United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea

UNFSA: United Nations Fish Stocks Agreement

UNODC: United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime

W

WeCAPS: Strengthening the security and safety of ports in West and Central Africa

(1)
The EUMSS will be implemented via this Action Plan and in the framework of the Integrated Approach. It will use all available EU civilian and military policies, tools and instruments, and coordinate policies and activities of all relevant players at European, regional and national level, strengthening their synergies and complementarities. It will also promote a more coherent engagement of the EU in external conflicts and crises, to enhance the security of the EU and its citizens.

(2)
Concerned Actors listed in the action plan will contribute in line with their respective competences, responsibilities and mandates. The EU agencies in this action plan are those identified as actors under the various actions of the action plan, and any role assigned to them is without prejudice to the procedures and decisions of their respective administrative boards as regards agencies’ contributions to these actions. Other relevant EU agencies may also be invited by the Commission or Member States to collaborate in the implementation of the action plan. Agencies will participate in international work through the respective EU services (‘parent DGs’).

(3)
https://marine.copernicus.eu/

(4)
Article 71 of UfM SBE Declaration: Ministers welcome the active role taken by the MedCGFF in enhancing regional cooperation and promoting understanding of maritime issues of mutual importance and of common interest related to coast guard functions across borders and sectors, both civil and military, and invite the forum to develop training activities and further facilitate exchange of information, expertise, technical assistance, training and best practices to address illicit activities at sea.

(5)
Regulation (EU) 2019/1896

(6)
The operational phase and the timing of each action listed in this action plan are subject to activation of the task, following EMSA Board approval.

(7)
  https://defence-industry-space.ec.europa.eu/welcome-iris2-infrastructure-resilience-interconnectivity-and-security-satellite-2022-11-17_en

(8)
Regulation (EC) No 725/2004

(9)
Directive 2005/65/EC

(10)
Regulation (EU) 2019/452

(11)
http://www.emilyo.eu/ ; EMILYO is not linked to the Erasmus+ Programme.

(12)
The HCoE handbook is the basis for relevant training events for participating states, EU and NATO operators and policymakers.